KEP for Graduating CronJob to GA (#1996)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/20190318-Graduate-CronJob-to-Stable.md

> ---

Author: Done.

    - [CronJob Limits](#cronjob-limits)
    - [Frequency of launched jobs](#frequency-of-launched-jobs)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
  - [CronJob v1 API](#cronjob-v1-api)
  - [CronJob v1beta1 API](#cronjob-v1beta1-api)
  - [Validations](#validations)
- [Tests](#tests)
  - [E2E test](#e2e-test)
    - [Existing test cases](#existing-test-cases)
    - [New test cases](#new-test-cases)
  - [Conformance Tests](#conformance-tests)
  - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
- [Implementation plan](#implementation-plan)
    - [Release X](#release-x)
    - [Release X+1](#release-x1)
    - [Release X+2](#release-x2)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Alternatives and Further Reading](#alternatives-and-further-reading)
    - [Cron Aspect](#cron-aspect)
- [Improvements/Considerations](#improvementsconsiderations)
  - [Add Counters](#add-counters)
  - [Add .status.conditions](#add-statusconditions)
  - [Support Jitter for cronjobs](#support-jitter-for-cronjobs)
  - [Support Timezone for cronjobs](#support-timezone-for-cronjobs)
  - [CronJob umbrella issue](#cronjob-umbrella-issue)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> [CronJob](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/cron-jobs/) is a Kubernetes API that creates Job object on a schedule specified by a cron spec. It is in beta status since v1.8 and currently it is marked deprecated with target release for removal being v1.22. This document lays out the plan to promote it to stable.

Author: Confirmed this with @sttts it means removal happens in 1.22

> [CronJob](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/cron-jobs/) is a Kubernetes API that creates Job object on a schedule specified by a cron spec. It is in beta status since v1.8 and currently it is marked deprecated with target release for removal being v1.22. This document lays out the plan to promote it to stable.

Author: @deads2k can prove me wrong, also :wink:

> [CronJob](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/cron-jobs/) is a Kubernetes API that creates Job object on a schedule specified by a cron spec. It is in beta status since v1.8 and currently it is marked deprecated with target release for removal being v1.22. This document lays out the plan to promote it to stable.

Reviewer: if the API is deprecated in 1.22 before going GA, you will have another beta before you can go GA: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blame/master/keps/sig-architecture/1635-prevent-permabeta/README.md#L94

## Motivation

CronJob is useful to run periodic tasks using cron like facility in a kubernetes cluster. Its `.spec` has been stable for the last few releases. We feel the API with additional `.status` information is ready to be promoted to Stable and be supported long-term by the community.

## Goals

- Write a new controller which will
  - Use informers instead of polling
  - Address some open issues with the current controller
  - Add metrics exposing controller throughput, latency etc.
- Extend CronJob status field
  - lastSuccessfulTime: tracks the last time the job completed successfully
  - nextRunTime: tracks the next time the job will be scheduled

## Proposal

### Plan for promoting CronJob to GA

To promote to GA we would create `batch/v1/CronJob` in the [batch/v1 API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/batch/v1/types.go).

> We shall have dual implementation of controller (old and new) co-exist.

Author: Yes, updated that.

> Through a feature flag the new controller implementation is controlled.

Author: Fixed.

> - alpha (disabled, can be enabled)

Author: Done.

- beta (enabled, can be disabled)
- GA (enabled, cannot be disabled)

> API will track the controller since GA-ing the API implies GA-ing the scalable implementation of the API.

Author: I removed that sentence, we're covering API changes further down.

### Existing controller

> The current implementation of the CronJob controller is different that the other workload controllers. GA workload controllers use informers and caches to reduce the load on API server. Whereas the cronjob controller does a periodic poll and sweep of all the objects and acts on them. The CronJob controller has only one worker doing this.

Author: Done

> 1. syncs all CronJob objects [every 10 seconds](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller.go#L98).

Author: Replaced all links.

2. Using pager library, gets all Pods and all CronJobs and [processes them one by one](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller.go#L136)

This is not a scalable design and ends up loading the API server. Also this does not follow the [recommended guidelines](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-api-machinery/controllers.md) for building controllers.

### New controller

> With this approach we aim to:

Reviewer 2: nit: scale issues already include 2 and 3
```suggestion
With this approach we aim to reduce the potential scale issues (e.g. load on API server and memory usage) when using lots of CronJob objects.
```

Author: Done.

1. Reduce the potential scale issues when using lots of CronJob objects
2. Reduce load on API server in such cases.
3. Reduce memory usage

#### Informers and Caches

To reduce the need to list all Jobs and CronJobs frequently to reconcile, we propose to use Informers and WorkQueue based architecture. We would be sharing the [same informer cache](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/controllermanager.go#L450) as the Job controller uses.

We will follow a controller structure similar to existing workload controllers and as [outlined in the guideline](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-api-machinery/controllers.md#rough-structure).
```golang

// CronJobControllerV2 is 2nd generation controller for cronjobs.
// It is using informers and workqueue to improve its performance over
// the old controller.

> type CronJobControllerV2 struct {

Author: Fair, we'll keep the feature flag with V2, though.

> type CronJobControllerV2 struct {

Reviewer 3: Sure - feature flag is about V2, so that sounds fine to me.

	queue	   			workqueue.RateLimitingInterface
	recorder   			record.EventRecorder

	jobControl 			jobControlInterface
	cronJobControl  		cronJobControlInterface

	jobLister  			batchv1listers.JobLister
	cronJobLister 			CronJobLister

	jobListerSynced 		cache.InformerSynced
	cronJobListerSynced		cache.InformerSynced
}

// CronJobControllerConfiguration contains controller config
type CronJobControllerConfiguration struct {
	// concurrentCronJobSyncs is the number of cronjob objects that are
	// allowed to sync concurrently. Larger number = more responsive
	// but more CPU (and network) load.
	ConcurrentCronJobSyncs int32
}

> // Controller code

Reviewer 3: nit: I'm not entirely sure it makes sense to put this code here (it's pretty much the same as in all other controllers) and it adds unnecessary 40 lines imho.

Author: Removed.

3. [Golang timers in multi-cpu systems](https://github.com/golang/go/commit/76f4fd8a5251b4f63ea14a3c1e2fe2e78eb74f81)
4. [Go timerwheel](https://github.com/RussellLuo/timingwheel)

### Metrics

We propose to add metrics that could expose the performance and health of the controller including and not limited to:
- Skew (actualJobCreationTime-expectedJobCreationTime) - [Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram)
- Job failures - [Gauge](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter)
- Job successes - [Gauge](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter)
- API server errors - [Gauge](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter)
- Job scheduling latency (podCreationTime - jobCreationTime) - [Histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram)
- Queue depth (pending CronJob and Job entries in the Queue) - [Gauge](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#gauge)

Queue depth can be surfaced from existing controller framework.

### Add .status.lastSuccessfulTime

[#issue/75674](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75674)

> Add `lastSuccessfulTime` to `.status` that tracks the last time the job completed successfully. This will augment the `lastScheduledTime` available in the `.status` in the v1beta1 api. Potential use is in monitoring (e.g. fire an alert if lastSuccessfulTime is more than X ago).

Reviewer 2: Will `.status.lastSuccessfulTime` always record the last time a Job completes successfully? For example, if the CronJob allows concurrent Job, and an old Job completes after the new one, `.status.lastSuccessfulTime` will still record the completion time of the older Job, right?

Author: yes, b/c the other job (with `Forbid`) won't be allowed to run, with `Replace` or `Allow` it will always be the last job's time.

### Add .status.nextScheduleTime

[#issue/78564](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/78564)
Add `nextScheduleTime` to `.status` that tracks the next time the job will be scheduled. This may not be accurate with `Forbid` concurrency policy. This only tracks the `Job` creation time and not the actual `Pod` creation time.

| Concurrency policy | notes |
|:----------|:----------|
| Allow   | `nextScheduleTime` would be accurate within a margin of controller scheduling jitter |
| Forbid  |  `nextScheduleTime` would not be accurate if the previous `Job` takes longer than the cron interval time |
| Replace | `nextScheduleTime` would be accurate within a margin of controller scheduling jitter along with older concurrent `Job` cleanup if applicable. |

> 

Reviewer 2: What's the purpose of this field? It's an estimate that can be retrieved from `.status.lastScheduleTime` and the cron spec. If it's not always correct, suggest not putting it in the status to avoid confusion. We could easily add this field after the controller is GA.

Author: I don't have any strong motivations, moving to future improvements.

  - Should list cronjobs for all namespaces
  - Should update a cronjob
  - Should patch a cronjob
  - Should delete all cronjobs in a namespace
  - Should get a cronjob status
  - Should update a cronjob status
  - Should patch a cronjob status
- Tests covering Bug fixes
  - [issue/63371 - Should not start “missed” jobs from old cronjob after updating time](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/63371)
  - [issue/74741 - Should cleanup finished pods when job is completed](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/74741)
  - [issue/76570 - Should not keep creating new pods when job image has ImagePullBackOff error](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/76570)
  - [issue/78646 - Should change schedule when schedule value is not wrapped with quotes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/78646)
- Scaling
  - Should be able to create and schedule at least 5000 cronjobs
  - Measure scheduling skew, podCreationLatency and check if it meets expectation (To Be Defined)
- Start Stop Tests
  - Schedule cronjobs and randomly stop the controller and start it.
  - Schedule cronjobs and stop the controller and start it after the deadline.

> 

Reviewer 2: Should there be a test for having cronjobs switching between 2 controllers (toggling the feature flag)?

Reviewer 3: Effectively there will never be two different controllers running at the same time (even in HA setup only one will be the leader).
So how would this test be different from actual "controller restart"?

Author: We need to ensure to run full e2e with both, I need to sync with sig-testing how to set it up, but never we'll be running these two at the same time.

- [Validates Job cleanup](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller_test.go#L371) path of the controller under different conditions.
- [Validates Status](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller_test.go#L593) of the CronJob after sync under different conditions.

## Implementation plan

#### Release X

- Alpha: Feature flag for new controller is disabled by default
- Dual controller. Both old and new implementation co-exist

#### Release X+1

- Beta: Feature flag for new controller is enabled by default. If the distribution chooses it can be disabled
- Introduce CronJob in batch/v1

#### Release X+2

- GA: The feature flag is deprecated and the old controller code is cleaned up

## Graduation Criteria

- [ ] Implement shared informers to reduce pressure on API Server
- [ ] Pass conformance tests
- [ ] Update documents reflecting the changes
- [ ] Pass CronJob e2e tests
- [ ] Pass CronJob unit-tests
- [ ] Pass scale tests

> 

Reviewer 3: Please also adjust to the new KEP template and fill in prod readiness (at least the questions marked as required for Alpha).

Author: Done.

|Ordered timer list| Maintain ordered list of Cronjob keys and next time of expiry. Keep starting a timer with the earliest expiry. | Efficient. Reinsertion to list takes O(n) |
|Timer trees| Instead of ordered list use a sorted binary tree. | More efficient. Insertion is O(log n) |
|Heap based timer|A variant of ordered timer list where heap is used to store the next expiry time | Efficient compared to ordered list. Bookkeeping and insertion is O(log n). |
|Simple Timing wheels| circular buffer of MaxTimeOut slots. List of expiring timers at each slot. | Works for small bounded  MaxTimeOut which is not our case. Insertion and removal is O(1) via indexing |
|Hashed Wheel| Hash expiring time and insert in a hash table with linked list at each index | Bookkeeping is O(1) and worst case insertion is O(n) |
|Hierarchical Wheel| multiple timer wheels for different resolutions (Seconds, minutes, hours, days). When seconds rolls over we grab the next minutes timers and recreate the seconds wheel. similarly for minutes and hours. | Sharding at different hierarchy levels improves insertion and bookkeeping performance. |

## Improvements/Considerations

> 

Reviewer 2: The improvements listed below aren't blockers for CronJob GA, I presume?

Author: Added comment to make it clear.

- `SuccessfulRuns` Count of all successful runs
- `FailedRuns` Count of all failed runs
- `FailuresSinceSuccess` Count of failed runs since last successful

### Add .status.conditions

Add a condition array with `Settled` condition type. This would help with the effort of standardizing conditions across all core types. `Settled` is set at the end of every successful reconcile run. The key thing to note here is the notions of `Settled` does not imply the `Job`s are running correctly. It just means that the controller is done processing this object successfully.

NOTE: This should be handled across all of SIG-Apps owned controller.

### Support Jitter for cronjobs

We propose to introduce `.spec.jitter` which is a percentage of the time delta to the next schedule. We propose to cap it to 50%. There is also a [community request](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/issues/2440) for this.

```golang
delta = nextScheduleTime - currentTime
jitter = delta*cronjob.Spec.Jitter/100
nextScheduleTime += jitter
```

### Support Timezone for cronjobs

We propose to introduce `.spec.timezone` which indicates the timezone to be considered when scheduling this cronjob.

> Clusters across different environments have different timezones. There is no known recommendation or conformance test to define timezone for the master. Different distributions may have different behavior. For cronjob, the timezone is inferred from the master. Someone with just API access has no idea what that controller manager timezone is. Sometimes cluster operators too, who run the controller manager in a container with a UTC timezone on a host with a non-UTC timezone.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Clusters across different environments have different timezones. There is no known recommendation or conformance test to define timezone for the control plane. Different distributions may have different behavior. For CronJob, the timezone is inferred from the control plane (specifically, the timezone as seen by the kube-controller-manager process). Someone with just API access has no idea what that controller manager timezone is. Sometimes cluster operators too, who run the controller manager in a container with a UTC timezone on a host with a non-UTC timezone.
```
WG Naming are driving an activity to avoid some names, and _master_ is likely to be on the list.

Author: Incorporated.

These conditions imply that people with just API access who want to predict when their job will run have no guarantee. By providing a timezone field we provide an absolute value instead of relying on the relative timezone of where the master is running. This ensures more portability of the CronJob configs across clusters as well.

> This is an optional field and when not present reverts to existing behavior of using the master's timezone.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't try to merge those two together. We need to graduate CronJob to GA to avoid it being removed. The admission controller is kind-of extension of the feature.

> This is an optional field and when not present reverts to existing behavior of using the master's timezone.

Author: I agree with Wojtek, it's pretty orthogonal to this proposal, it can be done but it's not a requirement.
